The 32,000–word novella The Time Machine by H.G. Wells, published in 1895, is generally
credited with popularizing the idea of time travel by means of a time machine, a vehicle
which takes the occupant backward or forward in time. Dozens of sequels and adaptations
over the years have further promoted the notion. Indeed, Albert Einstein’s Theory of
Special Relativity lays the foundation for the possibility of time travel. So far, no one
has demonstrated the ability to travel in time. However, time machines have been
constructed, and they do allow glimpses into the past. The most efficacious time machine
currently in existence is the Hubble Telescope, named after the American astronomer Edwin
P. Hubble. Its capability to locate distant astronomical targets and lock in on them,
permitting their faint light to aggregate on its detectors, allows it to peer far into the
past. Light travels 186,000 miles per second. The Hubble Telescope has looked back in time
at 10,000 galaxies whose light left them billions of years ago. Therefore, utilizing the
telescope as time machine, astronomers are able to contemplate galaxies as they were eons
ago. Although the telescope was launched into space in 1990, its inception was almost a
half– century earlier as astronomer Lyman Spitzer, Jr. mulled over the possibility of a
large space telescope in a 1946 report, “Astronomical Advantages of an Extra–Terrestrial
Observatory.” Because the earth is bathed in its constantly churning atmosphere,
earth–based telescopes cannot penetrate deep space; the atmosphere distorts the view.
Telescopes were constructed on mountains, but there was still no way to wholly escape the
effects of the layers of gases enveloping the earth. During the 1960s, the Space Race
between the then–Soviet Union and the United States was accelerating. The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was established. Funds for space endeavors
were abundant, and plans for a large space telescope, by then designated the LST, were
underway. The designs called for a 2.4–meter primary telescope mirror which could be
transported into space by one of NASA’s rockets. According to National Geographic’s
Imaging Space and Time, the resolving power of the deep space telescope would be
“equivalent to being able to distinguish the left and right headlights of a car in
California seen from New York, or features less than 1/30,000th the size of the full moon.
This was at least a tenfold increase over the atmospheric limit.”